and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business
growth show i'm your host sam dunning
and co-owner
over at webchoiceuk.com today i'm joined
by
gil cohen gill's the founder at employee
experience design
he helps companies design employee
experiences that improve both the
outcomes of the organization
and the lives of its employers guilt a
really warm welcome to the show sir
thanks for having me appreciate it no
worries man looking forward to it so
we're gonna be
chatting across a bunch of things
hopefully and
providing some juicy tips and insights
across
how we can hire the right employees
but at the same time give them the sa
the the best experience
they're not just going to be here for a
day a week a month uh hopefully stay
a lot longer and help our business grow
and help them grow
so i know from speaking from experience
hiring especially
is no easy feat let alone retaining them
and i mean from experience here at
webchoice we've had some
great great hires but at the same time
we've had some real struggles
especially when it comes to hiring sales
staff
so i don't know if you've seen any of
this skill but from my experience
anyway hiring sales reps is a heck of a
game because a lot of them can really
talk the talk walk the walk they might
have the gift of the gab
everything might look awesome on paper
when they do in the interview but when
they rock up
and they start hitting the phones or
they start doing the the sales
and prospecting work you want them to do
a few weeks in a few months in it's like
this is not the guy or guild i hired
um everything they said if you went flop
so
i'd love to know um kind of what you
think of the hiring process and perhaps
share some best practices on what you
should be doing and
what you shouldn't be doing as a as a
business owner or hiring manager
it's it you've hit you know you've hit
something really important there about
how hard it is
to hire sales people because if they're
any good at selling they could be very
good at selling themselves but not good
at selling your
product so you have to find the ways
to piece through that to understand how
do i make
sure that this sales person isn't just
telling me the right answer is
just telling me what i want to hear but
they're going to actually
live up to it and so from my experience
from my research for
for my career the biggest thing that you
need to do in terms
of making a connection giving yourself
the best odds of the person living up to
it
is using behavioral interviewing and
behavioral techniques
so there's two aspects of behaviors
there's the
high level ones of what everybody in the
company should be doing
most companies call them values you can
call them other things
but in terms of values you need
to define them behaviorally because that
way you actually know what really
matters in your organization you can't
just use big fluffy words like respect
and integrity and honesty
and expect them to have any sort of
meaning
okay so the first thing you need to do
is you need to set these curves
bones for your organization of what does
it mean to work here
what are the things that we truly care
about the non-starters that we want
everybody in our organization to live up
to
sdr on their first day the ceo all of
them need to that and then
there's the competency behaviors of what
specifically are we looking for from
sales people
so you need to understand okay so what
how have sales people been successful in
the past within your organization
talk to them follow them discuss with
them about what are the behaviors that
make them successful
and then ask the questions of candidates
of are they already living those
behaviors find out from them
stories they've shown those behaviors or
not because if they've shown those
behaviors
you're not going to have to work on them
you're not going to have to struggle
with them they're already going to do
them
which makes it more likely that they'll
end up living up to their promise
instead of just being really good at
selling themselves which a lot of sales
people
are but then their behaviors don't back
that up so the research
has shown that behavioral interviewing
and behavioral
methods help you increase the odds of
actually getting
the person that you want interesting
so what i'm taking away from this skill
is that there's
work research we need to do before we
actually jump in so
let's say our business is expanding
perhaps it's just us perhaps we're
thinking
we've got to a point in we've we're
hitting x amount of revenue we can't
quite serve the customers we want to
sell we need to take on board our first
hire that might be a sales rep that
might be a marketer
it sounds like from what you said there
instead of just jumping in
um getting on all the recruitment polls
and getting a bunch of interviews lined
up we actually need to do some planning
beforehand
in terms of what you'd know there in
terms of what actually means to work
here
what we're looking for exactly the
behaviors um
perhaps if we've got staff already
possess um
and looking out for those in the
interviewees that we're bringing on
board is
is that about right or is there other
things we need to consider well there
are there's a lot of things to consider
but you've hit the nail on the head of
where you need to start is you need to
do
research and really it's about
introspection at this point it's not
about company best practices it's not
about benchmarking it's not about
anybody but you because you are the ones
that have to live up to that so
as a founder when you sit down and think
about okay so what are the values that
we want within the organization what are
the
curbstones the behaviors that we want
everybody to live
first of all you need to start with
behaviors that you're already living
they can't be aspirational they can't be
ideas well it might be nice if we did
this it might be nice if we did that you
can't change
values that easily you can't just say it
that's why there are so many
employees around the world who look
at their company's stated values with
contempt because they know they're
meaningless
because the leaders articulated them in
an inauthentic way
and then don't live up to them so why
have them
so the first thing you need to do is
look internally be authentic with
yourself of
what are the things that really really
matter to you that
they're non-starters they can't be in
competition with each other
there's no ranking of core values versus
other values
it's either a value or it isn't but
really it's about introspection and
understanding you know if it's just the
founder or the founders
within yourself if you have brought on
staff already
trying to understand from them also
because
they'll know what your lived values are
they'll know based on your decisions and
your behaviors
what you really care about and they can
help keep you in check and making sure
that those values that you articulate
are authentic
before you then go to uh
figure out if the candidates actually
live up to these values
and the gap in between there is
articulating the right kind of questions
to be able to that's
that's what i was going to say so is it
is it almost
as if we put together a kind of
checklist skill of of all these points
we've just ran through in terms of
the behaviors that we believe we follow
or that we believe our staff follow
the values that our company has what it
means to work here
do we kind of compile this into a
checklist and read off a hundred
questions
our potential interviewer is there a
better way to do it there is uh that is
a terrible
terrible way to do it so no there is a
much better way to do it so when it
comes to when you're trying when you get
to the point of the
conversation where you want to determine
if they have these behaviors because
you'll have obviously your other
questions around skills and knowledge
and experience sure
you know the traditional interview
questions but when you get to the
behavioral
questions what you have is like you said
a checklist now when it comes to values
there shouldn't be more than 20 to 25 of
these behaviors
because you can't overwhelm people um
but you have your checklist
then you determine which are the ones
that are really the knockout factors
at any given time and this might change
depending on you know
how you're trying to work through things
you translate them into behavioral
questions the thing about a behavioral
interview question is they have to be
asked in a very careful ways
because the ultimate goal what you're
trying to find is
how did this person behave in the past
so it's ultimately tell me a story
when you did something but
if say my value is respect
and in respect that means that you know
if somebody tells you something you
disagree with respecting them means
disagreeing with them
right right so you can't just ask them
the question of so what did you do last
time somebody disagreed with you
or how did you respond or anything like
that because you can lead the person
down a path
whereas if you ask them questions around
you know a time you were in conflict
with another person whereas so you can't
put the words in their mouth you can't
leave them with what the behavior
that you're looking for in that given
question because what you're looking for
is their honest response of how they
behaved
in a given situation so if they
behaved in accordance with the values
with the behaviors that you've set
forth then they
meet the criteria if they're not living
up to those behaviors
then they're not meeting the criteria
and one really great thing about
this and that's really important is that
when you're interviewing
it's all about comparing to the profile
it's all about comparing either to the
values or the competency profile
not to each other because sometimes what
happens when you compare people to each
other you're just getting the best of
what's available when in reality none of
them might actually meet the criteria
to be great in the job and so
comparing them to the profile and
comparing them to the role
in understanding this is what we need
i'd rather
wait a while till we have the right
person
than take the best of what's available
and one of the other great things about
behaviors one of the reasons i love it
beyond the research that shows that it
collects better information
is that it reduces the subjectivity
okay because one of the problems in
hiring is that we're all human
we all have our cognitive biases we all
make assumptions i mean there's
there are studies that say we make a
hiring decision within the first 90
seconds of the interview
there are some people who believe that's
within the first nine seconds of the
interview
to take ourselves away from those biases
from those beliefs of oh is this person
like me
or you know do do i like the way they
answered my pet question
what it does is it puts greater
objectivity into
understanding here are the behaviors cut
and dry
and did they live them cut and dry and
this is also one of the reasons why when
conducting behavioral interview
it's best practice to have a panel that
it's not just
one person asking the questions taking
notes and having to remember everything
but having one person sort of drive the
conversation asking the questions
focusing on the individual
in the other two people taking notes
while also asking questions
probing questions where appropriate it
helps reduce
the bias of that one person who thinks
they heard it one way because what
happens when you do interviews this way
the panel then meets afterwards and you
often find that you heard things
differently
and you have to calibrate you have to
make sure you know because one person
was taking notes
missed a one of the sentences whatever
it is
we're human we're not going to hear
everything we're not going to remember
everything and so that's why having
multiple people
around commonly understood behaviors
takes away as much as possible that
subjectivity that bias
and puts it more into more objective
measures of
is this person right for the role and
what can they add to the organization
yeah like that and i like the the part
about having a panel because like you
said it might be that you
completely miss one point or you need to
discuss it or you completely
yeah it just didn't take on border their
point of view so that does make sense
um so with that said gil looking for
those behavior aspects
are there any because i know when um
let's let's use myself as an example um
and this probably won't bode well so
when
when i was in my my younger years i'm 30
30 years old now but probably in my
early 20s
when i first started out on sales i used
to think jobs like this were all about
having the gift of the gap being able to
blag your way through it
and basically being able to convince the
person on the other end of the interview
or the phone
that you could sell your stuff when in
fact there's a heck a lot more to
professional selling and i had it
completely wrong
glad i finally learned that but with
that in mind how do we
determine if the
potential if the interviewee that we're
chatting to how do we
determine are there any ways or are they
not um that we can determine they're
being genuine
that they're not being as bsing us that
perhaps they're giving stories they're
giving examples
they're showing that they've got the
right behaviors um they're showing they
understand
what we're looking for and they can be a
valuable asset are there any kind of red
flags we need to look out for
are there any signs from your experience
that this person front that's just being
really genuine
or um how to determine um let's say that
the week from the chat
ask them for references for their
stories that's what you need to do
so you'll they'll be telling you stories
and you prepare them at the beginning of
the interview that
they'll be you'll be asking for this but
if they tell you a story
or every time they tell you a story and
you ask for a reference it and they say
oh that person doesn't work there
anymore oh it happened a long time ago
i'm not in contact with them
and there's never an acceptance of yeah
here's the person who you can reach out
to
then it brings into question the
validity of the story
it can happen once in a while like if
you ask for a reference for
one of the stories they tell and they
say you know i really can't do that for
confidentiality reasons or it happened a
long time ago whatever
that's one thing it can happen once in a
while but if it's happening for all of
their stories or it's happening
regularly
that is a major red flag that they're
not necessarily telling the story
accurately
because i i can tell you for example um
when my brother was in university he
started up a program
to go to schools to help them in terms
of reading programs and all of this
except a few years later when he and his
friends were going out for interviews
you'd be amazed about how many of them
started up this program
because it wasn't just him who's told
the story of starting up the program
it was all of his friends who all told
the story of them starting up the
program
whereas if you actually asked the people
involved only one of them could have
started it
so the rest of them might have been
scrambling in providing references where
he would have been more comfortable in
saying okay you can call this teacher
you can call this principal
because uh i was the one in uh in
contact with them
gotcha yeah like that that's that's
definitely a great way of um
getting to the facts and cutting through
the fluff pretty fast okay
so that's some hiring best practices
when it comes to actually on boarding
let's say we've
we've picked what we feel are the right
um recruits or
team members for our company are there
any things we need to consider when it
comes to
onboarding um new people to our team and
i appreciate this is going to vary
depending on the industry
you're in but from your experience girl
are there any best practices that we
should take on board
so the first best practice needs to be
seeing it from the new employees
perspective
the problem that most onboarding
programs have
is they the organization looks
internally and says what do we want to
accomplish in the first
three to six months what do we want to
know about the person what
do we want them to to do what
information do we need to gather it's
all from the organizational perspective
and which isn't aligned with creating a
great experience
because it's all about you know oh well
you walk in
and here's two hours of paperwork that
you have to fill out
and then you have to go get your picture
and all of these things
that doesn't make for a great day uh
necessarily
whereas um if you understand
what they're going through because one
of the
changes in society especially as
millennials have taken over the
workforce
is that gen xers like myself and older
generations
we didn't leave jobs very quickly we
would think if you know if i can't leave
this job under a certain amount of time
i'll be considered a
a job hopper you know that'll look bad
on on my resume
it's not loyal all of these things
millennials
thankfully and totally agree with it
threw that all out the window
they're like no you give me a bad
experience
i'll go drive uber for a little while
i'll do something i'll live at my
parents house
i don't care but i have better things to
do with my life than spend 40 hours a
week working at a bad place
and so historically we looked at
onboarding companies looked at
onboarding of let's throw all of our
information at them
and make them enabled to do their job
but the reality is in a modern time even
in covid even in the pandemic
the way modern employees view onboarding
is as a job trial as do i
actually want to be here so
if they had one experience as a
candidate experience and you
were great and giving them feedback and
bringing them along and all that kind of
stuff
and then all of a sudden when they come
on board in it's not the same
they'll be looking to leave relatively
quickly
and so you have to make sure that you're
aligning
what you want to accomplish with the
psychology of the human being
who's facing a completely new
situation and most people right now
are facing a completely new situation
where they're not actually meeting their
colleagues in person
and so that adds another level of
complexity
so if instead of throwing constant
paperwork at them
through making making them watch this
video and have this person
talk at them have understanding that
how does how do people in this role and
you you hit it right that it depends
industry to industry even company to
company
how do our people like to be integrated
how do our people need to be brought on
because a salesperson
might need to be brought on in a
different way than say an hr person
because helping a salesperson you know
find
early wins building their confidence
right helping them ramp up in those ways
versus an hr person who in my opinion
should be sitting down and listening and
not saying much for the first little
while
that onboarding is going to need to look
a little bit different
yeah that's some good points i'll just
jump in gil and
so like like you said that now the times
were in now
and people aren't staying in jobs as as
much as they did before and years gone
by it's statistically proven
um and like you said when you join a new
role
you might be bombarded with paperwork
you've got to do headshots you've got to
meet the team you gotta do this for an
hour you gotta do that for now you gotta
do this for half an hour
so your first week your first couple
weeks calendar are just full of these
monotonous admin tasks um it's hard to
interrupt but that's if they've actually
prepared for you
because because there are plenty of
organizations that have barely prepared
for you you get your laptop on day five
four or five you know you people aren't
expecting you there
so one way or another if you're not
considering
how they're integrating you're going to
miss something
good ad um so rather than doing that
let's say we
just like you quite rightly said we want
to give the these new employees the
great experience go ultimately if we
piss them off if we bore them too much
they're probably just gonna
think i don't really like this company i
want to go elsewhere um
does that mean we hyper tailor it for
them so we say look what would you like
to be doing on your first couple weeks
and
kind of really tailor it to this
particular individual which probably
would be hard work if you're a larger
scale company
might be a bit easier if you're in a
smaller co do we speak to our existing
team like you said whether they're sales
reps and say look what what did you like
about onboarding what could be improved
and get their feedback or if it's hr
talk to them and
again ask them for the best bits and
pieces that we can weave in
or is it some is it a completely
different approach
um so it's it's really starting with
your existing employees
that's really where you need to start is
understand okay so what do we have
because for what you have already
there's going to be good and there's
going to be bad
and you don't want to just you know blow
everything up and create unnecessarily
work
unnecessary work when you've already got
some good things going for you you know
in terms
of onboarding orientation whatever it is
but then talk to them and understand the
friction points
talk to them and understand which ones
of them ramped up
faster why did they ramp up faster
because
maybe it's they had a conversation with
a certain employee
who helped everything come together you
know and help them understand this is
how we really do things around here
maybe it was shadowing a person for half
a day
there could be a variety of ways and
reasons
why once you dive into it that
the employee experience could be a good
onboarding experience or a bad one
but you don't know until you talk to
your employees and then
as you bring people on talking to them
in keeping that feed
back loop going so you've got a new
employee
and you talk to them and say hey look
you know part of it is
we're always trying to improve how's
your day going
how's your week going is there anything
you need just
talking to them and understanding you
know
what they're going through because it's
not about what you think it is or what
you want it to be
what they're going through is ultimately
all that really matters
that's all that really all that really
matters so
if you understand that that's all that
really matters what you want to do as an
organization is get the best possible
understanding of them
to dive in as clearly and as accurately
as possible and say okay
this is the reality of today what are we
doing well
what are we doing wrong let's adjust it
doesn't need to be a major
overhaul of the entire system or maybe
it does maybe your system's terrible and
you're not ready for the people and all
that
but it's taking the things that for your
people
make connections so for example uh i
worked for a company a few years back
very social people very much like
constantly talking to each other very
social group
and so as part of the onboarding there
was taking the person out for lunch on
the first day with a bunch of people
together
okay because it was a part of the
culture there of eating together and
that's when a lot of conversations would
happen
it's not for everybody that's not right
for everybody
but for those of us at that company
because of who we were and what both the
company and the individual were trying
to accomplish
it really made sense because it helped
people make connections
it helped meet people not just oh this
is
gil he does accounting you talk to him
for these reasons but you sit around you
meet them and you find out oh
this is gil he likes this band he likes
this
uh sport whatever it is and you get to
know them which then
builds the uh relationships yeah yeah
yeah and that that will make sense like
you say it's going to vary for each
organization
and and what works i guess a team
building exercise depending on what you
do where your people are based and stuff
but
no i like the example so moving this
down to brass tax
um deal rather than so these these
things we're talking hiring right
onboarding right when it comes to
really keeping our employees engaged
is it just good to reduce churn or do
these things really help our
businesses increase revenue increase
bottom line
um yes the answer is
yes it it obviously it helps reduce
churn uh improve retention
and there's you know numbers that i
could i could
talk to about that but then there's also
the
experience of those who stick around
right because
those are the ones who are actually
doing the work so you could have people
who stick around you could create an
environment where people stick around a
while
but it's not in anyone's best interest
that that actually happens they're
certainly not in the organization's
best interest that that so a person
who's in a role who's performing at
you know two-thirds productivity
over time that's significant and one of
the resources i would
lead people to when when thinking about
that is
there's a concept of employee lifetime
value and if you look up el tv
online it's a great visual
representation
of the impact of different employees
the impact of retaining an employee over
an extended period of time
the impact of having an employee who's
growing and developing versus an
employee who's stagnant
an employee who's productive and engaged
versus an employee
who's just present and
that's in that is a really valuable tool
and i find it helps
demonstrate for leaders who are
uncertain about it because when you look
at some of the charts
and they're really i mean they're really
powerful when you look at you know sales
because el tv is a bit conceptual for a
lot of roles
it's not for sales you can put in real
numbers on that and show
the power of having one sales person for
five years versus five sales people
each for a year yeah i mean i was going
to say in terms of sales obviously you
can you can go by revenue
it's yeah it's not that hard um yeah
but when it comes to other pieces of the
puzzle
so let's let's disregard marketing
because they can these days be pointed
to revenue and people can flame me after
the show if they wonder about that
um let's let's talk about things like
whether it's
i don't know hr or let's say they're in
a more technical
role um those things are quite hard to
judge are they not
and they are and so when it comes to
this visual it becomes more
of a academic exercise and
demonstration that it's pretty
you know it seems pretty logical
and and clear when you when you look
through the information
and so when you you look you know two
people uh one of them's
productive one of them is not productive
the person who's productive is going to
bring more value to the organization
one way or the other however you define
value because a good hr team
you know should be connected to turnover
right it's not directly their fault or
their responsibility but it should be
connected on a certain level to turnover
so there are some numbers you can you
can point it to but reality is in the
end it's not so much about showing
here is the raw data it's more just
showing
look when you keep a person happy uh
productive
engage in for an extended period of time
it's they just bring more value to the
organization
yeah yeah and in terms of keeping our
staff engaged
um is it about what keeps everyone
ticking and learning
about each individual what their
motivations are and why they want to be
doing the job and then trying to
tailor that among the years or is it
using what's worked for other staff in
the past
i mean if we take sales people that they
might be incentivized by money they
might be incentivized by going to
presidents club or
they might want to win holidays um if
they're in marketing they might
be something completely different hr
might be something again and
so is it understanding that or is it
just making sure you're taking regular
feedback from them as we discussed
before or there are other things
um on top of those that we need to be
aware of that we can
kind of do our best to keep our
employees engaged which is going to give
us the positives of all the things we've
discussed so far
so there are different levels of
customization
and tailoring so what you should be
doing over time so in it's similar to
that um the onboarding that we were
talking about
there should be a general onboarding for
your organization
because there is a type of person the
the values the behaviors you're looking
for
every organization through its own ways
ends up
kind of hiring a cohort that has a
certain type of thinking
and so when you've gathered the thinking
of that group
you have you know a 70 80 solution
of this is how our people generally
think
this is how our people generally want
things but then there is always that
place for
that continuous feedback that
individualization
of helping managers individualize it
because that's the point
at which they need to do it because
there's the general onboarding that
should be followed that you know
people in our organization are looking
for x y and zed and we need them to know
a b
and c let everybody needs to do that but
in talking to that i may find out that
you know
sam might need check-in calls twice a
day instead of once a day
because of what he's looking for or you
know what sam doesn't even like the
checking calls once a day
he needs it every two or three days and
so adjusting but that it goes to the
manager building the relationship with
the individual that
we're not all the same we might have
kind of general commonalities but we're
not all going to be the exact same
and there needs to be the flexibility
within that
yeah makes perfect sense gil um really
appreciate you coming on thanks very
much for covering
points across the hiring on boarding and
engagement process with
our staff before we wrap things up i
want to put you on the spot of one tough
question
what's one thing we should not be doing
when it comes to hiring what is the
ultimate red flag
one thing um hiring on
gut decisions hiring based on
i on instinct of oh i like this person
i think they you know that's where we
get into the situations where
those sales people present themselves
well
and all sizzle and no steak and so a few
months later they haven't produced
anything
but they've presented themselves really
well
often that's because of the gut of the
hiring manager
whereas if the hiring manager dove into
the behaviors
that are needed for the role and that
individual
has expressed in the past there would be
a mismatch
yeah yeah yeah so go back to that
checklist at the start go back to the
data
nice one nicely wrapped up gil thank you
very much for coming on sir
enjoy the show thank you for having me
no worries man please do tell us more
about
how we can learn from you how we can get
in touch and the best way to
find out more about you best place to
find me is on linkedin
just gil cohen um search that gil cohen
i'm on there regularly talking about
employee experience and human resources
and just people issues that work that's
really where
my passion lies you can check out my
company at
employeeexperience.ca and learn more
about me
and some of my programs awesome man gil
thanks once again appreciate you coming
on
awesome thanks so much tim no worries
dude if you enjoyed the show be sure to
hit subscribe to business growth show
where the heck you get your podcast from
we interview business leaders each and
every week to buy
actual tips across marketing across
growing your business
and growing your sales and with that
we'll catch you
on the next episode